---
id: "ch02-peripherals"
title: "Ch. 02 - Peripherals and Connectors"
---

# Understanding Common Peripherals, Interfaces and Connectors
There are so many different peripherals that can be attached to a computer, each with its own unique interface (meaning how it can be used by the computer and programmer or user). Some peripherals functions are more specific while others are capable of multitasking.

## Audio and Video Devices
Most audio devices will connect using a 3.5mm connector (similar to what you might find on wired headphones) to connect to your sound card, which is likely built in to your motherboard. There are likely many 3.5mm slots available each using a different color to identify it's purpose. The two most important to know are: 
- Speaker (audio output): identified with a green connector
- Microphone (audio input): identified with a pink connector 

The computers we use wouldn't be very useful without a monitor or display, allowing us to visually receive information from the computer. However, not all displays are created equally. Below is a table identifying different common types of display technology 

| Name | Definition |
|------|------------|
| Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) | The big, old, heavy computer monitors you may remember from the late 90's - early 2000's. These use an electron gun  to shoot beams of electrons at the back side of the monitor screen to create an image. | 
| Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) | Light, generated by a florescent tube lamp, passes through liquid crystals electrically charged at different energy levels, determining the color represented on the screen | 
| Light Emitting Diode (LED) | Uses electrically charged liquid crystals, but the light is generated by a more energy efficient and environmentally friendly LED light. |
| Plasma | Instead of using liquid crystals, an ionized gas is charged to represent the color on the screen. These have a shorter lifespan and are prone to "burn in" |
| Projector | A lighted image is displayed against a wall or projector screen, useful for larger spaces like classrooms and meeting rooms. | 

**Other Display Vocabulary:**
- **Resolution:** is measured by the how many software picture elements are used to draw the screen. Resolution is measured in a ratio of row and columns called Pixels. These pixels are illustrated by both the column and row numbers.
- **Dot Pitch:** is how much space (measured in mm) is between each pixel. For example: a 24" 1920x1080 resolution monitor will have a sharper image than a 65" TV with the same resolution, because of it's lower dot pitch.  
- **Lumens:** is a unit used to describe strength of a light, typically used in describing a projector. A projector that is intended for use in a well-lit room requires higher lumens than one that would be used in the dark. 

Touchscreen displays allow the user to input data by touching the screen, which would mimic the actions of a mouse pointer clicking on a selected item. Cleaning touchscreens with glass cleaner can ruin the screen, due to the special coating that is used to make the screen. The best method to clean a touchscreen would be to use a damp cloth with water.

There are many different types of Video connectors that are associated with these devices mentioned. Examples of popular connectors are *Video Graphics Array (VGA)*, *Digital Visual Interface (DVI)*, *Universal Serial Bus (USB)*, *High Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI)*, *DisplayPort*, *Mini DisplayPort* and *Thunderbolt*.

- **VGA** also referred to as a Generic Analog Video connector is a 15-pin video connector, that takes in analog signals only and is typically blue in color.
- **DVI** connectors are known to support both analog and digital signals. The port and its connector typically colored white.
- **USB** transmit video data digitally and can power the devices that connect through that port i.e.  Connecting a portable monitor through USB.
- **HDMI** is a 19-pin connector that has very fast transfer speeds, which supports digital data only. This connector is capable of transmitting Audio, Video, network connectivity and provide power to the devices.
- **DisplayPort** is intended for video devices only, but can transmit audio and video at the same time. This connector was meant to replace the VGA and DVI however it was toppled by the HMDI connector.
- **Thunderbolt** was developed by Apple as an offshoot of the DisplayPort along with the Mini Display Port. This port not only supports video, but several other devices can be connected to the same port.

Adjusting and Configuring displays requires making sure that the monitor is connected to the device, installing the driver and configuring the devices resolution settings through the monitor itself or using the software that is provided by the manufacture. On laptops you may have to adjust the monitor by using the function keys identified by Fn.

## External Storage and Communications Connectors
External Storage devices have been around before internal storage existed. Today we have different types of devices that we use to store data externally. i.e. *Flash Drives*, *Memory Cards*, *External Hard Drives*, *External Optical Drives* and *Network Attached Storage (NAS)*.
- **Flash Drives** also known as thumb drives, have replaced the floppy drives due to their compact size, speed, capacity and simplistic use. These drives typically use USB connectors to plug in and use Flashing technology to store data to and from a computer device.
- **Memory Cards** also use flashing technology to store and save data however they look different from their thumb drive counterparts. They also may require a separate memory card reader to be connected to your computer.
  - Memory cards are used in mobile devices (digital cameras, video cameras, cell phones) due to their small size, and comes in three prominent standards: **Smart Media**, **Compact Flash** and **Secure Digital (SD)**.
- **External Hard Drives** are basically the same thing as an internal hard drive except, they are enclosed in a protective case and connects via an external connector. These drives typically come in either as an HDD or SSD. Connections and connectors typically associated with External Hard Drives are: USB, FireWire, eSATA and or Thunderbolt.
- **External Optical Drives** are drives that work similar to their internal counterparts however they are designed to work externally and use connectors such as USB, FireWire, eSATA and or Thunderbolt.
- **Network Attached Storage (NAS)** devices allow you to access a hard drive over a network, making it easy to share with multiple computers. A NAS can also be configured to allow for fault-tolerance, which we learn more about in [Ch. 11](/docs/ch11-businesscontinuity). A NAS will almost always connect using an Ethernet (RJ-45) connector, but can also support Wi-Fi (not recommended).

### External Storage Connectors 
External Storage Connectors come in different shapes and sizes, some examples include: USB, eSATA, FireWire and Thunderbolt.
- **USB** have many different upgrades that have been made to them in order to support the demands for higher data transfer speeds. USB supports 127 devices on a since port.
- **eSATA** works the same as its SATA counterpart, however it has been designed to connect externally from the chassis. The ‘e’ in SATA stands for external. This connector can support 15 devices on a single bus.  Other variations of this port allow power through the cable i.e eSATA+, eSATAp, eSATA/USB.
- **FireWire** developed by Apple as a method to engineer a connector capable of high speeds. This connector is also known as IEEE 1394, FireWire and iLink. FireWire can achieve transfer speeds up to 3.2 Gbps and can connect up to 63 devices on a single bus. FireWire was later replaced with Thunderbolt connector in 2014.
- **Thunderbolt** replaced FireWire due to its reliable data transfer and high-speed throughput reaching speeds up to 40 Gbps, while consuming less power.

### Communications Connectors
Communication Connectors use two types of cords for all wired networking connections The standard is identified by RJ-, which stands for Registered Jack. 
- RJ45 also known as Ethernet cable. This cable has eight leads on the connector and has a max speed of 10Gbs, depending on it's category (version).
- RJ11 also know as a telephone cable. This cable has 4 leads, but only 2 are typically used. The maximum data transfer rate for these cables is 40Kbps, which is significantly less than RJ45. 

## Input and Output Devices
Even though we live in a decade in which AI is on the rise, computers can’t do anything until they are given input telling them what to do. Providing output is also a critical function to computers, because it shows the computers response to the user’s commands or input.

Two common input devices on most computers are a keyboard and a pointing device (such as a mouse). Common output devices include monitors, speakers, and printers.

**Keyboards** come in many different shapes and sizes, the standard (or flat) keyboard, and ergonomic keyboards, which are designed to prevent typing-related injuries. The most common keyboard configuration for Latin script languages is called QWERTY. An alternative, DVORAK, which places letters in better spots to increase typing speed, also exists. Keyboards use connectors such as USB and PS/2 (a legacy connector).

Five different types of pointing devices are commonly used today:
- **Mouse:** a small handheld device that is dragged across a solid surface to move the cursor on a computer screen.
- **Touchpad:** allows the user to use move the cursor by using your finger, and will often have two buttons, one for left and another for right clicking.
- **Joystick:** is an input device consisting of a stick that pivots on a base and reports it angle direction to the computer, which would move the cursor.
- **Stylus:** is an input device that resembles a pen, which is used to enter commands on a touch screen.
- **Trackball:** is an inverted mouse with a ball. The ball is exposed and you roll it around with your thumb and/or fingers.

Connecting pointing devices typically consist of USB and PS/2. These pointing devices come up with a few configuration options, such as: choosing default hand, cursor response speed and button mapping.

**Printers** are output devices that are used to put information from the computer onto paper. There are several different technologies used to get an image on paper:
- *Inkjet printers* spray ink on the page to form the image. They intake an ink cartridge, which is a small plastic container that holds the liquid ink the printers use to create images. Their cartridges are commonly referred to as **CMYK** cartridges, referring to the colors of ink used (**C**yan, **M**aroon, **Y**ellow, and blac**K**). These cartridges are very expensive, and can dry out if not used regularly. 
- *Laser printers* use a dry powdery plastic resin called *toner*, which is stored in a replaceable toner cartridge. These printers are generally bigger, faster and more expensive than Inkjet printers, but have a lower *price-per-page* when printing. 
- *Thermal printers* are designed to use a special type of paper. Heat is applied to the paper, which causes it to turn a special color. Receipt printers are a common example of a thermal printer.

**Multifunctional or all in one printers** have additional features added to them, such as a scanner, copier, or fax machine. This allows the printer to be both an input and output device. 

Your printer needs to connect to a computer in order to receive a "print job", or to know what to print. Some of the connectors you could use include: 
- **Serial:** 9-pin connector that sends data serially meaning 1 bit at a time, one after another. This technology is considered a legacy technology.
- **Parallel:** 25-pin connector typically colored pink, that receives data 8 bits at a time over eight separate wires (a bit for each). This technology was also known as the "Printer Connector" and is also considered legacy.
- **USB:** most modern printers will support a USB connection, though this often limits it to being used by a single computer.
- **Network:** most popular for printers in homes and businesses today, as it allows us to print from any device on the network. Connecting the printer could be done wired via Ethernet or Wi-Fi.

## Understanding Installation Basics
When installing devices there isn’t a simple answer because a lot of it depends on the type of device you’re connecting. Common devices that require connection could either be internal or external.
-	Internal devices are devices that go inside of the case. When installing the device, the user has to make sure that the computer or case is powered off. Next is placing the right component on the right slot, then turn the computer on install the driver or any software that the component may come with for full functionality.
-	External devices are devices that are outside the case, these do require to power from the computer or case. These devices typically take advantage of the plug and play feature, which allows the OS to automatically install the driver and configure all the settings of the device.
-	IP and Web-based Devices are the only peripherals that will require IP or Web-based devices for installation. (Review text for more information.)

## Reviewing Connector Types
| Type             | Released | Max Speed | Primary Uses | 
|------------------|----------|-----------|--------------|
| VGA              | 1987     | n/a       | Video (analog)|
| DVI              | 1999     | 3.96 Gbps | Video (digital and analog) | 
| HDMI             | 2002     | 48 Gbps   | Video (digital)|
| DisplayPort      | 2008     | 25.9 Gbps | Video (digital)|
| Thunderbolt      | 2011     | 40 Gbps   | Video, hard drives, audio, docks, PCIe expansion|
| USB              | 1998     | 20 Gbps   | Keyboards, mice, printers, and many others|
| FireWire         | 1994     | 2.3 Gbps  | Digital video cameras, hard drives, macOS and Linux networks|
| eSATA            | 2003     | 6 Gbps    | Hard drives and optical drives|
| PS/2             | 1987     | n/a       | Keyboards and mice| 
| Parallel         | 1970     | 20 Mbps   | Printers | 
| Serial (RS-232)  | 1962     | 115 Kbps  |Modem, printers, mice, control console for server and router management |
| RJ-45            | 1976     | 10 Gbps   | Network cards |
| RJ-11            | 1976     | 56 Kbps   | Modems |


# Summary
This chapter covered the different peripherals devices and the connectors that come with each peripheral. We also looked at the various changes in the connectors as the demand for higher transfer rates became the norm along with the evolution of the devices that came along. In the next chapter we are going to look at newer computing devices and the Internet of Things.
