---
id: "ch10-securitypractices"
title: "Ch. 10 - Security Best Practices"
---
# Understanding Security Best Practices
In the world of computers, there is no guarantee that users are safe. User’s may follow all of the best practices and still it would not be enough, however the goal of this chapter is to learn how to make user’s device as difficult to penetrate as possible, which would make it un appetizing for attackers. This chapter will educate users in how to Harden their device, manage users and encrypt data. Just as you wouldn’t want to walk in a dark alley at night, the same concept is applied to your computer in a network filled with other computers.

## Device Hardening
Device Hardening are the proactive steps that a user/s take at the local machine (their	computer/s) to reduce the likelihood of a successful attack. Concepts behind device hardening include: Updating Devices and Using System Passwords, protecting against Network Threats, Removing and Disabling Software and Services, and Browsing the internet safely.
- Updating Devices and Using System Passwords is the first step to ensure that your device is secure.
- Using System Passwords prevents users from accessing the device (if the device was stolen).
- Desktop and Laptops: Simply enabling a system password through BIOS and enabling a Screen save password would deny access.
- Mobile Devices: simply enabling a lock screen and passcode would deny access to the device.
- Android: Configured through Settings > Security.
- iPhone: Configured through Settings > Touch ID & Passcode.
- Updating devices: Secure devices by making sure that the any software-based vulnerabilities have been fixed if not patched.
- Windows: Windows Update utility updates performs updating services.
- Mobile devices:
- Apple iOS: Settings menu > General > Software Update.
- Android OS: Settings menu > About Phone > System Updates.
- Protecting Against Network Threats can be very difficult because that is were Malware lies. There are four classes of applications that can be used to protect your device/ system from malware and hackers:
- Antivirus Software finds viruses by scanning all the files on a user’s computer system. Antivirus detects viruses by searching files for redirecting code and/or looking for files with virus signatures. Once a virus is discovered, Antivirus software may prompt the user to delete or quarantine the virus.
- Quarantine: Placing the virus in an off-limits area so that it cannot run, but the virus is still in the user’s system.
- Deletion: removing the infected file or virus from a user’s system.
- Redirect code: is code that makes an applications command and code revolve around virus, while running a separate task.
- Virus Definition: is a snippet of a virus’s code that gets compared to an antivirus software database of virus definitions for detection.
- Antispyware Software applications look for know spyware and adware programs and offer to disable them or remove them from a user’s system. They do this by looking for (comparing) definitions, that is snippets that identify a spyware or adware component. Antispyware applications are most effective when their definitions are up-to-date.
- Antispam Software is software that is used to capture spam. There typically is no harm with spam except when its used to perpetrate fraud, either by trying to sell useless or nonexistent products or navigating users to phishing websites that may contain viruses or other malware.
- Spam refers to unwanted junk email.
- Diagnosing and Fixing Malware Infections can either be simple or complex. Typical symptoms when Diagnosing a computer/ machine that is infected would include: Sluggish system, CPU and Memory usage unusually high, perpetual warning messages that won’t go away, receiving strange emails and finally pop-up ads whenever the user is using a browser.

The following 5 steps are used to fix an infected system:
1.	Identify malware symptoms.
2.	Quarantine the infected system.
3.	Remediate infected systems.
4.	Schedule scans and updates.
5.	Educate the end user to avoid a repeat performance.

- Software Firewalls monitor and filter network traffic. They protect your network resources from bad traffic generated by hackers, and they simultaneously prevent computers on your network from accessing undesirable content on the Internet. There are two different types of firewalls, network-based and host-based.
- Network-based: are firewalls for the network.
- Host-based: are firewalls for the computer or local machine.
- Removing and Disabling Software and Services may not seem like a big problem but it is. Unused programs and features may cause security holes that hackers would love to exploit. Because a user is not using a particular program, an attacker may plant a bug within that program and continue to run tasks in the background without the user noticing.
- Removing Unwanted or Unnecessary Software from your system is the best method of preventing your system from being vulnerable. Ignoring pre-installed that is not being used means that users may not have the software maintain updates which could pose security risks to the device.
- Disabling Unused Communication Methods is another form of protecting a user’s device from unwanted traffic e.g. Disabling Bluetooth service to prevent bluejacking, or disabling Near-field communication (NFC) to prevent unwanted transfer of information to their device. This issue typically affects Mobile devices and can be prevented by going to the mobile devices settings and disabling the configurations.
- Disabling Unused Services is sometimes automatically done by the OS, however if a user knows what they are doing it is important to make sure that they are disabling services that they are not using.
- Disabling AutoPlay is a best practice to protect devices/computers from allowing unknown external storage devices from automatically running once plugged in. The reason is that the media (Flash drive, DVD, CD) could contain malware, which would install automatically once the drive has been plugged in.
- Browsing the Internet Safely doesn’t guarantee protection, however it allows user navigating the web, be aware of the potential dangers of Browsing the Internet. Below are the techniques that can be implemented to improve Browser safety:
- Keep your browser up-to-date, older browsers have greater potential for security exploits.
- Manage plugins, add-on, toolbars, and extensions. This reduces potential holes to the system and consumption of system resources.
- Manage security settings properly by configuring browser cookie settings, clearing cache and enabling pop-up blocking.
- Know how to recognize secure websites by avoiding sites that only have HTTP: or invalid certificates. And also going to sites that have HTTPs, which can be done by accessing the browser settings. Finally disabling browser AUTOFILL which is a feature that automatically populates fields in a form on a web page for a user.
- Tips for Safe Browsing the web will help users become the opportunities that hackers or attackers take advantage of when a user navigates the web. Web browsers work by downloading and displaying web pages, when a user request a website, the page is downloaded. Hackers and attackers take advantage of the opportunities presented during download, these individuals could perform activities such as intercepting the server or running scripts that also contain malicious code that infects a user’s system.
- Do not visit questionable sites such as: sites that offer free software downloads, are filled with hate-themed material and Adult content websites.
- Limit the use of personally identifiable information such as name, address, other contact information, names of family members, other information considered private.
- Personally, Identifiable Information: is anything that can be used to identify an individual person on its own or in context with other information.
- Recognizing Suspicious Sites, Links and Ads can be very difficult when navigating the world wide web. Attackers and Hackers intentionally go to great lengths to keep it that way, while stealing information from users.
- If visiting a website, look for signs of security such as a Lock symbol of the browser address bar and also making sure the site includes “https” instead of “http”.
- Websites that have Incorrect Spelling, which is a common method for having unsuspecting users to log into it thinking that it is a legitimate site when it’s not.
- Incorrect Spelling or Bad Grammar, typically occurs with emails, real business emails typically have a spell check system in place.
- Threats are huge indicator that you are being tricked to be redirected to a suspicious site.
- Deals That are too good to Be True for example receiving emails that advertise that the user won something or they have been select for some form of cash prize is another huge indicator that something is off.

## Managing Users
Users present the weakest link in the security chain. Performing the following tasks will help users be alert to security risks and greatly reduce the chances of an attack. These tasks include, managing user account types, setting proper expectations with users on privacy and acceptable user policies and managing passwords.
- Managing User Account Types by disabling user accounts that are not needed e.g. Guests. Also renaming the user accounts prevents a hacker from accessing the right account with Admin account. User accounts typically come in three categories:
- Administrators: can essentially do anything on the computer.
- Users: Standard users that cannot make any changes to other users but their own.
- Guest: are very basic, they provide access to the internet only or access to a particular program at a public kiosk.
- Managing User Expectations and Behaviors should be written clearly identifying policies and procedures that are deemed inappropriate and the consequences for performing those actions within a company.
- Acceptable use Policy is a written document that states policies and procedures identifying actions that are inappropriate and the consequences for performing those actions.
- Expectations of Privacy should clearly inform employees that everything that is owned by the organization or company will be monitored by the company or organization, and although social media information maybe private it may also be subject to the same terms if it includes information that regards the company that it works for.
- Handling Confidential Information are the policies set in place on how to manage information that is considered confidential.
- Managing Passwords involves proper user training and is aided by restrictions a network administrator can set on users if their computers are part of a domain.
- Creating Effective Passwords is creating a strong password that is difficult for someone to guess. Strong passwords have the following characteristics:
- Long: meaning it will have more than 8 characters.
- Complex: it contains at least one capital letter and at least one number and/or symbol.
- Unusual: The password doesn’t appear to be in a dictionary and isn’t a proper noun or word.
- Substitute zero for the letter o in words: e.g. `St0rageR00m`
- Substitute numbers for letters: use the numerical that represents the letter of the alphabet or use the numeral that represents the position in the word.
- Combine two or more unrelated but memorable words: e.g., `GroceryCandleFlowerpot`
- Substitute a symbol for a letter that it resembles: e.g., `$ubstitution`
- Passwords Changes meaning have a system in which you change your password many times e.g., Companies’ IT policies require that you change your password at regular intervals, such as every 90 days.

## Using Data Encryption
Using data encryption in networks allows protect from sniffers whom are tying to read the data. There are 2 encryption methods, symmetrical and asymmetrical.
- Symmetrical: is when the same key is used to both encrypt and decrypt data packets.
- Asymmetrical: is when one key is used to encrypt and another key is to decrypt, this method is more secure because it requires a user to have both keys instead of one to read the data.
- Cipher text: is when a sender and receiver encode or encrypts text messages making it difficult to read them.
- Public key Infrastructure (PKI) is a popular asymmetrical encryption technology which uses 2 keys, a public and a private key.
- Encrypting Data at Rest simply means encrypting data in either at the disk level or at the file level and not on the network level. This level of encryption typically protects the files on the device rather than the files that are being transmitted.
- Encrypting Data in Transit means encrypting data that is on the network. For a system to accept the data that is being transmitted and received, both the sender and the receiver should support the same encryption standard.
- Email: All major corporate email providers and the big public ones support the encryption of emails in transit.
- Internet Browsing: Meaning if a website has HTTPS then it would mean the data being transmitted to and from a user would be encrypted.
- Virtual Private Network: is a secure, encrypted connection between two specific computers.
- Mobile Applications: meaning most mobile applications will encrypt data in transit, but if the application doesn’t support it then.

# Summary
This lesson was focused on security best practices. It looked at device hardening, which included keeping the software up-to-date, using passwords, and changing default passwords. Next was protecting against network threats using antivirus and anti-malware software and software firewalls. Then user account management which meant clearly defining which user accounts to use and disabling accounts that are not in use such as guest accounts. Finally, we concluded with encryption of the device’s files and data packets, and the data packets being transported in its network. 	
